---
title: 'Reinterpreting state shifts using legacy data: colonialism and zooarchaeological
  assemblages in southern Arizona'
author: 'Nicole Mathwich'
date: '2019-03-31'
slug: legacy-mathwich
categories:
  - Presentations
tags: [Presentations]
description: ''
featured_image: '/post/2019-02-09-abstract-mathwich_files/Slide9.JPG'
---

### Nicole Mathwich, Ph.D.
#### Arizona State Museum, University of Arizona, Tuscon, AZ


**ABSTRACT**

Complex systems approaches to archaeological interpretation are
well-established in the discipline and offer important ways for studying
change over various scales. Large datasets and regional syntheses invite
new applications of complex systems applications of complex systems to
archaeological data. At the same time, indigenous and postcolonial
perspectives have increasingly become foundational to project planning,
data collection, and interpretation. Despite the importance of these two
approaches to contemporary archaeology, researchers seldom interpret
complex systems concepts and methods through indigenous ontological
frameworks. The lack of substantial dialogue between these theoretical
approaches results in uncritical applications of complexity theory which
inadvertently reinforce scripts of settler colonialism. This paper uses
legacy faunal data from southern Arizona to challenge the
prehistoric/historic break often used in the interpretation of
archaeological materials. This case study of data reinterpretation
examines how careful data sharing and indigenous perspectives can inform
interpretations of state shifts in complex systems and colonialism.

![Title slide](/post/2019-02-09-abstract-mathwich_files/Slide1.JPG)

Legacy data are out there. They are online. They are owned by
universities. They are being incorporated uncritically into many theses
and dissertations. As managers and researchers, how do we re-use these
data with an eye toward making them more accessible and more inclusive?
Legacy data often have outdated ways of organizing time and space. If
researchers simply continue to stick close to the original categories,
there is a risk of carrying problematic assumptions forward
uncritically. While this certainly touches on issues of data aggregation
(Atici et al. 2013; Cooper and Green 2016), we know the issues with
legacy data go deeper than methodological diversity.

![LEGACY DATA CAN Allow for large-scale comparisons, Captures long-term environmental changes, Provide the most complete picture possible, When digitized and readily accessible, can be used by descendent communities](/post/2019-02-09-abstract-mathwich_files/Slide2.JPG)

The development of large databases offers the opportunity to both
rethink the standards of data collection, and to engage with community
stakeholders in new ways. Instead of tracking down data in reports,
scholarly journals, and archives from multiple sites with paywalls and
barriers, researchers can now access original data in large databases.
One hopes that accessibility will lead to greater engagement and
conversations about data sensitivity and incorporation of new collection
methods. While this aggregation theoretically provides new opportunities
for researchers from historically marginalized groups to collect and
interpret data for projects guided by their own perspectives, legacy
data pose a variety of challenges.

![Structural categories can inhibit research. Reify one society’s perceptions of time and space. Erase and conceal Indigenous persistence and flexibility.](/post/2019-02-09-abstract-mathwich_files/Slide3.JPG)

Decades of older data must continue to be brought into shared digital
databases, simply for their own preservation. These legacy data were
collected by researchers at various moments in archaeology’s history and
the data bring with them all the assumptions from those periods. The
data archaeologists collect remain its most powerful tool and are
foundational to the culture of the discipline. As archaeology continues
to wrestle with decolonizing archaeological practice, there continues to
be a tendency to cleave to the original data organization used by the
analyst. Practical possibilities for reinterpretation of legacy data
must include re-evaluation of basic levels of organization.

For this presentation, I’ve chosen to focus on a methodological and
conceptual approach which is becoming increasingly influential in
archaeology, but also requires large quantities of digital data. Complex
systems view human social and environmental interactions as a system.
These are broad interdisciplinary approaches. These approaches simplify
much of human interaction by creating models, but they also offer new
ways of looking at social and environmental change. Of interest here are
the opportunities to model Indigenous value systems and changing
relationships to the environment and potential predictive abilities,
which may benefit contemporary communities as they evaluate the
long-terms effects of resource use. These models and concepts are tools
but are ultimately limited by the data used. What a researcher puts in
affects what they get out.

The problem here is that complex systems often require large quantities
of data and may be used by researchers outside of archaeology with
limited understanding of the ethical considerations and colonialist
approaches of past archaeologists. Many of the papers in this session
are coming from a database management and government archival
perspective. I’m approaching this from a research and educational
perspective. The questions I seek to answer are: How do I as researcher
and educator maintain data accuracy? How do I also ensure what I produce
and what my students produce from older data better reflects
contemporary archaeological values?

As a case study to illustrate the issues legacy data can create, I
present a small case study showing the impact legacy categories can have
on something as basic but as profoundly important to archaeology: time.

The prehistoric-historical archaeology divide in North American has been
issue of ongoing debate and methodological review (Scheiber and Mitchell
2010). The historical period marks the appearance of European plants,
animals, objects, and pathogens, but these are materialist definitions
of the period concerned with the interpretative potential of these
artifacts. The historical period is a moving target because contact
between Europeans and Indigenous groups occurred earlier than some of
these signature materials appeared at sites. In other cases, introduced
materials and animals appeared before direct contact, traveling through
Indigenous trade networks before face-to-face contact with Europeans
(Mitchell 2015). Indigenous groups across North America have extensive
oral traditions, many of which do not mark a break between the
“prehistoric” and “historic.” Lightfoot and Martinez (1995) noted over
two decades ago that the divide between historical and prehistoric
periods was artificial at best (Lightfoot and Martinez 1995; Silliman
2012). At worst, the division of the periods as two separate fields of
study disconnects contemporary Indigenous peoples from their precontact
ancestors. Alienation from the past has political ramifications for
descendants’ legal claims to land and cultural objects (Panich and
Schneider 2014). For the most part, archaeologists recognize the
artificiality of the boundary, and the limitations of binaries inherent
in terms such as “precontact” and “postcontact” (Schneider 2015b;
Silliman 2005). **When it comes to large databases, structuring in
continuity instead of cultural periods whenever possible helps eliminate
the tendency to divide the historical from prehistoric.** In this
presentation, I seek to show what might be gained through intentional
combination of historical and prehistoric legacy data in the Pimería
Alta.

![Santa Cruz Basin case study: Fauna from 31 sites, 46 contexts AD 500-1912 ¼” screened  Prehistoric and historical contexts typically analyzed and reported separately Tohono-O’odham homeland](/post/2019-02-09-abstract-mathwich_files/Slide7.JPG)

My research seeks to understand the ecological and economic contexts
that influenced native actors’ decisions at Pimería Alta missions by
understanding how livestock began to fit into previous subsistence
practices. The Pimería Alta, today southern Arizona and northern Sonora
was the northern borderland of New Spain and the heart of the O’odham
and Apache ancestral homelands. I focus here on subsistence at colonial
sites because livestock have the potential to drastically alter the
landscape through grazing. From the human perspective, livestock
required water, labor, range, and fodder from resources previously used
by local O’odham. The main sites for native interactions with introduced
livestock were the Spanish missions. From A.D. 1690 and 1850, O’odham
adjusted quickly to the new livestock resource, and cattle ranching
remains an important economic activity for the Tohono O’odham today. Various O’odham oral histories mark the arrival of the Spanish but
view the events of the colonial period within their longer history (Bahr
1994; Loendorf and Lewis 2017). The O’odham continuity an important
perspective to consider, and I used it as my primary way of organizing
the data.

The data presented here were a component of my dissertation research and
compared the use of rabbits and ungulates and overall species diversity
at 31 archaeological sites in the Santa Cruz River Basin, located in
southern Arizona.

Analysts in the southern Southwest tend to separate historical from
prehistoric automatically. The data came from legacy reports
which analyzed and reported prehistoric and historic components
separately, often in different chapters. For the full list of sites and authors' work used in this study please check out [Chapter 5 of my dissertation.](https://repository.arizona.edu/handle/10150/631374) Thus the prehistoric/historic
division is consistently maintained over generations of researchers. It
is reified every time a report is published. **To put the data together
in this way was the opposite of how these legacy data were originally
presented, yet it most accurately reflects contemporary O’odham
perspectives of their time in the Santa Cruz River Valley.**

Recent efforts to revitalize the use of native Sonoran foods focused
primarily on plants, not native animals ([Native Seed
Search](https://www.nativeseeds.org/pages/seed-bank), [San Xavier Co-op
Farm](http://www.sanxaviercoop.org/home.html)). Today, beef, rabbit,
chicken, and deer, are often considered traditional foods in the Tohono
O’odham Nation (Fazzino 2008). I was curious as to why these efforts to
revitalized native foods excluded native animals? My research suggests
that the stability of this new regime and the subsequent ethnographic
role livestock play in modern Tohono O’odham life suggest that this
reliance on livestock is not likely to change readily (nor does it need
to).

This case study illustrates the challenges legacy data present to
digital data managers and researchers. These data were already online in
various ways, but they weren’t systemically brought together, nor would
they likely be because of the prehistoric/historic divide. Digital data
managers should consider increasing their awareness of the needs and
possibilities of complex systems and help structure databases toward
those needs, particularly regarding time continuity. Traditional
archaeological categories, such as time, can uphold settler-colonial
values far beyond their publication dates to the exclusion of Indigenous
perspectives. Can legacy data be purged of their biases? No, and nor
would it be appropriate to alter the data so substantially from its original form. However, there needs to be a more active role
by researchers and data managers as well as more end-user guidance and
training of new researchers into how legacy archaeological ontologies
perpetuate settler-colonial perspectives. Are we maintaining a prehistoric/historic division when we upload data, and what can we do differently? This could take a variety of
forms, ranging from reporting requirements to short tutorials required
by new users before they are allowed to access data. As digital data
managers and researchers, I invite us to think of ways to help legacy
data incorporate Indigenous ontologies, make them more meaningful to
non-experts, and use digital data to encourage future researchers of
complex systems to engage with Indigenous ontologies.

**References Cited**

Atici, Levent, Sarah Whitcher Kansa, Justin Lev-Tov, and Eric C. Kansa\
2013 Other People’s Data: A Demonstration of the Imperative of
Publishing Primary Data. *Journal of Archaeological Method and Theory*
20(4):663–681. DOI:10.1007/s10816-012-9132-9.

Cooper, Anwen, and Chris Green\
2016 Embracing the Complexities of ‘Big Data’ in Archaeology: the Case
of the English Landscape and Identities Project. *Journal of
Archaeological Method and Theory* 23(1):271–304.
DOI:10.1007/s10816-015-9240-4.

Curry, Benjamin A.\
2017 Cattle in the Garden: An Environmental and Archaeological History
of Ranching at Rancho Refugio - Wilder Ranch. Unpublished Dissertation,
University of Arizona, Tucson, Arizona.

Fazzino, David\
2008 Continuity and Change in Tohono O’odham Food Systems: Implications
for Dietary Interventions. *Culture & Agriculture* 30(1–2):38–46.
DOI:10.1111/j.1556-486X.2008.00006.x.

Garlinghouse, Thomas S., and Benjamin Curry\
2009 *Appendix F: Analysis of Faunal Remains from Mission Period
Features at Santa Clara*. Uncovering and Interpreting History and
Archaeology at Mission Santa Clara: Reporting on Archaeological Data
Recovery at the Leavey School of Business, Murguia Parking Lot, and
Jesuit Community Project Areas. Santa Clara University, Santa Clara,
California.

Gifford-Gonzalez, Diane, and K Ueno Sunseri\
2007 Foodways on the frontier: animal use and identity in early colonial
New Mexico. *We are what we eat: archaeology, food, and
identity*:260–287.

Jones, Emily Lena\
2015 The ‘Columbian Exchange’ and landscapes of the Middle Rio Grande
Valley, AD 1300–1900. *The Holocene*:0959683615588375.
DOI:10.1177/0959683615588375.

Mathwich, Nicole\
2016 Prehistoric and Historic Vertebrate Faunal Remains from Mission Los
Santos Angeles de Guevavi, AZ EE:9:1(ASM), Santa Cruz County, Arizona.
In *Archaeology at the Mission of Sorrows: Archaeological Test
Excavations at the Guevavi Mission, AZ EE:9:1(ASM), Santa Cruz County,
Arizona*, pp. 103–125. Technical Report 2015–12. Desert Archaeology,
Inc., Tucson, Arizona.

Mathwich, Nicole, and Barnet Pavao-Zuckerman\
2018 Bureaucratic reforms on the frontier: Zooarchaeological and
historical perspectives on the 1767 Jesuit Expulsion in the Pimería
Alta. *Journal of Anthropological Archaeology*.
DOI:10.1016/j.jaa.2018.07.002.

Müller, Daniel, Zhanli Sun, Thoumthone Vongvisouk, Dirk Pflugmacher,
Jianchu Xu, and Ole Mertz\
2014 Regime shifts limit the predictability of land-system change.
*Global Environmental Change* 28:75–83.
DOI:10.1016/j.gloenvcha.2014.06.003.

Scheffer, M., S. R. Carpenter, T. M. Lenton, J. Bascompte, W. Brock, V.
Dakos, J. van de Koppel, I. A. van de Leemput, S. A. Levin, E. H. van
Nes, M. Pascual, and J. Vandermeer\
2012 Anticipating Critical Transitions. *Science* 338(6105):344–348.
DOI:10.1126/science.1225244.

Sunseri, Jun U.\
2017 Grazing to Gravy: Faunal Remains and Indications of Genízaro
Foodways on the Spanish Colonial Frontier of New Mexico. *International
Journal of Historical Archaeology* 21(3):577–597.
DOI:10.1007/s10761-016-0388-8.
